Dynamic Aspects Workshop (DAW04)

Call for Papers

Join points are the locus of aspect and functional code interaction.
Traditional aspect systems define join points in terms of the static
structure of programs. Method wrappers, before and after method calls,
variable setting and retrieving, and structural identification of object
fields are all examples of traditional join points.

Beginning with the "Jumping Aspects" paper of Brichau et al., examples began
to emerge in which it was desirable to invoke or change aspect behavior
based on the dynamics of program execution. Such situations include changing
behavior based on the call-stack context, co-occurrence of predicate
triggers, concurrent thread status, or events in the underlying interpreter
such as storage reclamation or process scheduling. Cflow in AspectJ was one
response to the need for dynamic aspects.

This workshop will seek to identify examples of useful dynamic aspect
behavior, suggest appropriate linguistic structures for dynamic aspects, and
discuss implementation techniques for dynamic aspects, such as shadow
compilation and modifications required in the underlying execution
environment. The workshop organizers are particularly interested in position
papers that describe experience with dynamic aspect systems or that outline
real problems which need dynamic aspects.

The primary goal of the workshop is technology interchange-we would like to
bring people working in this area to discuss the technologies they're using;
we would like to have the collective brainpower of the workers in the area
clarify the value of this work and its applications.

The topics of the workshop include:
   * Applications of dynamic aspects,
   * Models for dynamic aspects,
   * Techniques for validating dynamic aspect programs,
   * Linguistic structures for dynamic aspects,
   * Dynamic action expression and linguistic integration,
   * Implementation mechanisms for dynamic aspects,
   * Enabling technologies and environment support for dynamic aspects
(e.g., debuggers, IDEs),
   * The relationship between dynamic aspects and the rest of a software
system,
   * Challenges and research directions.

We will circulate the position papers before the workshop. At the workshop,
participants will present their positions and then break up into smaller
groups to explore specific topics in dynamic aspects. At the end of the
workshop, the smaller groups will reconvene to present their findings to the
workshop as a whole. We expect to publish the position papers and group
reports as a Research Institute for Advanced Computer Science technical
report. If possible, we may seek some additional venue for the publication
of highest-quality submitted papers.

This workshop continues some of the themes of the ECOOP 2003 workshop
<http://www.st.informatik.tu-darmstadt.de/pages/workshops/ASARTI03/index.html>Advancing
the State-of-the-Art in Runtime Inspection.

Attendance at the workshop is by invitation. Prospective workshop
participants should send submissions to
<mailto:mehner@upb.de><mehner@upb.de>, either (1) a full paper of up to
6,000 words, describing work on a topic germane to dynamic aspects, or (2) a
"position paper" of up to 2,000 words.

Important Dates

   * January 19th, 2004, Deadline for Submissions
   * February 9th, 2004, Notification of Acceptance
   * February 13th, 2004 AOSD Early Registration Deadline
   * March 22nd-26th, 2004, AOSD in Lancaster
   * March 23rd, DAW04

Program Committee

    * Gustavo Alonso
      Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH Zürich)
    * Kris de Volder
      University of British Columbia
    * Robert Filman (Workshop Co-Organiser)
      NASA Ames Research Center
    * Michael Haupt (Workshop Co-Organiser)
      Darmstadt University of Technology
    * Klaus Havelund
      Kestrel Technologies / NASA Ames Research Center
    * Stephan Herrmann
      Technical University Berlin
    * Robert Hirschfeld
      DoCoMo Euro-Labs
    * Guenter Kniesel
      Universities of Osnabrück and of Bonn
    * Crista Lopes
      University of California, Irvine
    * Katharina Mehner (Workshop Co-Organiser)
      Technical University Berlin
    * Mira Mezini (Workshop Co-Organiser)
      Darmstadt University of Technology
    * Christa Schwanninger
      Siemens CT/SE

Workshop Organisers

   * Robert Filman
   * Research Institute for Advanced Computer Science
   * NASA Ames Research Center, MS 269-2
   * Moffett Field, CA 94035
   * USA
   * E-Mail: <mailto:rfilman@mail.arc.nasa.gov><rfilman@mail.arc.nasa.gov>
   * Home Page:
<http://ic.arc.nasa.gov/people/filman/>http://ic.arc.nasa.gov/people/filman/

   * Michael Haupt
   * Software Technology Group, Computer Science Department
   * Darmstadt University of Technology
   * Alexanderstr. 10
   * 64283 Darmstadt
   * Germany
   * E-Mail:
<mailto:haupt@informatik.tu-darmstadt.de><haupt@informatik.tu-darmstadt.de>
   * Home Page:
<http://www.st.informatik.tu-darmstadt.de/staff/Haupt/>http://www.st.informatik.tu-darmstadt.de/staff/Haupt/

   * Katharina Mehner
   * Institute for Software Engineering and Theoretical Computer Science
   * Technical University Berlin
   * Franklinstr. 28/29
   * 10587 Berlin
   * Germany
   * E-Mail: <mailto:mehner@upb.de><mehner@upb.de>
   * Home Page:
<http://www.upb.de/cs/mehner.html>http://www.upb.de/cs/mehner.html

   * Mira Mezini
   * Software Technology Group, Computer Science Department
   * Darmstadt University of Technology
   * Alexanderstr. 10
   * 64283 Darmstadt
   * Germany
   * E-Mail:
<mailto:mezini@informatik.tu-darmstadt.de><mezini@informatik.tu-darmstadt.de>
   * Home Page:
<http://www.st.informatik.tu-darmstadt.de/staff/Mezini/>http://www.st.informatik.tu-darmstadt.de/staff/Mezini/
